Marya, helped by the alcohol, realized that the drawings were
beautiful. Groups of women. Masses of flesh arranged to form intricate
and absorbing patterns.

‘That man’s a Hungarian,’ explained Miss De Solla. ‘He’s just over
the way in the house where Trotzky used to live. He’s a discovery of
Heidler’s. You know Heidler, the English picture-dealer man, of course.’

Marya answered: ‘I don’t know any of the English people in Paris.’

‘Don’t you?’ said Miss De Solla, shocked. Then she added hastily: ‘How
perfectly lovely for you!’

‘D’you think so?’ asked Marya dubiously.

Miss De Solla assured her that it was.

‘I do think that one ought to make an effort to get away from the
Anglo-Saxons in Paris, or what on earth is the good of being here at
all? And it isn’t an easy thing to do, either. Not easy for a woman,
anyhow. But, of course, your husband’s French, isn’t he?’

‘No,’ said Marya. ‘He’s a Pole.’

The other looked across at her and thought: ‘Is she really married to
the Zelli man, I wonder? She’s a decorative little person--decorative
but strangely pathetic. I must get her to sit to me.’

She begun to argue that there was something unreal about most English
people.

‘They touch life with gloves on. They’re pretending about something
all the time. Pretending quite nice and decent things, of course. But
still....’

‘Everybody pretends,’ Marya was thinking. ‘French people pretend every
bit as much, only about different things and not so obviously. She’ll
know that when she’s been here as long as I have.’

‘As long as I have.’ The four years she had spent in Paris seemed to
stretch into infinity.

‘English people ...’ continued Miss De Solla in a dogmatic voice.

The drone of a concertina sounded from the courtyard of the studio. The
man was really trying to play ‘Yes, we have no bananas’. But it was an
unrecognizable version, and listening to it gave Marya the same feeling
of melancholy pleasure as she had when walking along the shadowed
side of one of those narrow streets full of shabby _parfumeries_,
second-hand book-stalls, cheap hat-shops, bars frequented by
gaily-painted ladies and loud-voiced men, midwives’ premises....

Montparnasse was full of these streets and they were often inordinately
long. You could walk for hours. The Rue Vaugirard, for instance. Marya
had never yet managed to reach the end of the Rue Vaugirard, which
was a very respectable thoroughfare on the whole. But if you went far
enough towards Grenelle and then turned down side streets....

Only the day before she had discovered, in this way, a most attractive
restaurant. There was no _patronne_, but the _patron_ was beautifully
made up. Crimson was where crimson should be, and rose-colour where
rose-colour. He talked with a lisp. The room was full of men in caps
who bawled intimacies at each other; a gramophone played without
ceasing; a beautiful white dog under the counter, which everybody
called Zaza and threw bones to, barked madly.

But Stephan objected with violence to these wanderings in sordid
streets. And though Marya considered that he was extremely
inconsistent, she generally gave way to his inconsistencies and spent
hours alone in the bedroom of the Hôtel de l’Univers. Not that she
objected to solitude. Quite the contrary. She had books, thank Heaven,
quantities of books. All sorts of books.

Still, there were moments when she realized that her existence, though
delightful, was haphazard. It lacked, as it were, solidity; it lacked
the necessary fixed background. A bedroom, balcony and _cabinet de
toilette_ in a cheap Montmartre hotel cannot possibly be called a
solid background.

Miss De Solla, who had by this time pretty well exhausted her
fascinating subject, stopped talking.

Marya said: ‘Yes, but it’s pretty lonely, not knowing any English
people.’

‘Well,’ Miss De Solla answered, ‘if that’s what you’re pining for.
What are you doing this evening? Come along to Lefranc’s and meet the
Heidlers. You must have heard of Heidler.’

‘Never.’

‘Hugh Heidler?’ protested Miss De Solla.

She proceeded to explain Mr Heidler, who was a very important person in
his way, it seemed. He made discoveries; he helped the young men, he
had a flair.

‘I believe they intend to settle in France for good now--Provence in
the winter and Montparnasse for the rest of the year--you know the sort
of thing. He’s had a kind of nervous breakdown. Of course, people say--’